Course Code 
UCHUT347 
CIE Marks 
50 
Teaching Hours/Week 
(L: T:P: R) 
2:0:0:0 
ESE Marks 
50 
Credits 
2 
Exam Hours 
2 Hrs. 30 Min. 
Prerequisites (if any) 
None 
Course Type 
Theory 
 
Course Objectives: 
1. Equip with the knowledge and skills to make ethical decisions and implement gender-sensitive 
practices in their professional lives.  
2. Develop a holistic and comprehensive interdisciplinary approach to understanding engineering 
ethics principles from a perspective of environment protection and sustainable development. 
3. Develop the ability to find strategies for implementing sustainable engineering solutions. 
 
SYLLABUS 
Module 
No.
Syllabus Description 
Contact 
Hours
1 
Fundamentals of ethics - Personal vs. professional ethics, Civic  Virtue, 
Respect for others, Profession and Professionalism, Ingenuity, diligence 
and responsibility, Integrity in design, development, and research domains, 
Plagiarism,  a balanced outlook on law - challenges - case studies, 
Technology and digital revolution-Data, information, and knowledge, 
Cybertrust and cybersecurity, Data collection & management, High 
technologies: connecting people and places-accessibility and social 
impacts, Managing conflict, Collective bargaining, Confidentiality, Role 
of confidentiality in moral integrity, Codes of Ethics. 
Basic concepts in Gender Studies - sex, gender, sexuality, gender 
spectrum: beyond the binary, gender identity, gender expression, gender 
stereotypes, Gender disparity and discrimination in education, 
employment and everyday life, History of women in Science & Technology, 
Gendered technologies & innovations, Ethical values and practices in 
connection with gender - equity, diversity & gender justice, Gender policy 
and women/transgender empowerment initiatives. 
6 
2 
Introduction to Environmental Ethics: Definition, importance and 
historical development of environmental ethics, key philosophical theories 
(anthropocentrism, biocentrism, ecocentrism).  Sustainable Engineering 
Principles: Definition and scope, triple bottom line (economic, social and 
environmental sustainability), life cycle analysis and sustainability metrics. 
Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Basics of ecosystems and their functions, 
Importance of biodiversity and its conservation, Human impact on 
6 

ecosystems and biodiversity loss, An overview of various ecosystems in 
Kerala/India, and its significance. Landscape and Urban Ecology: 
Principles of landscape ecology, Urbanization and its environmental impact, 
Sustainable urban planning and green infrastructure. 
3 
Hydrology and Water Management: Basics of hydrology and water cycle, 
Water scarcity and pollution issues, Sustainable water management practices, 
Environmental flow, disruptions and disasters. Zero Waste Concepts and 
Practices: Definition of zero waste and its principles, Strategies for waste 
reduction, reuse, reduce and recycling, Case studies of successful zero waste 
initiatives. Circular Economy and Degrowth: Introduction to the circular 
economy model, Differences between linear and circular economies, 
degrowth principles, Strategies for implementing circular economy practices 
and degrowth principles in engineering. Mobility and Sustainable 
Transportation: Impacts of transportation on the environment and climate, 
Basic tenets of a Sustainable Transportation design, Sustainable urban 
mobility solutions, Integrated mobility systems, E-Mobility, Existing and 
upcoming models of sustainable mobility solutions. 
6 
4 
Renewable Energy and Sustainable Technologies: Overview of renewable 
energy sources (solar, wind, hydro, biomass), Sustainable technologies in 
energy production and consumption, Challenges and opportunities in 
renewable energy adoption. Climate Change and Engineering Solutions: 
Basics of climate change science, Impact of climate change on natural and 
human systems, Kerala/India and the Climate crisis, Engineering solutions to 
mitigate, adapt and build resilience to climate change. Environmental 
Policies and Regulations: Overview of key environmental policies and 
regulations (national and international), Role of engineers in policy 
implementation and compliance, Ethical considerations in environmental 
policy-making. Case Studies and Future Directions: Analysis of real-
world case studies, Emerging trends and future directions in environmental 
ethics and sustainability, Discussion on the role of engineers in promoting a 
sustainable future. 
6 
 
Course Assessment Method 
(CIE: 50 marks ,  ESE: 50) 
 
Continuous Internal Evaluation Marks (CIE): 
 
Continuous internal evaluation will be based on individual and group activities undertaken throughout the 
course and the portfolio created documenting their work and learning. The portfolio will include 
reflections, project reports, case studies, and all other relevant materials.  
● The students should be grouped into groups of size 4 to 6 at the beginning of the semester. These 
groups can be the same ones they have formed in the previous semester.  
● Activities are to be distributed between 2 class hours and 3 Self-study hours. 
● The portfolio and reflective journal should be carried forward and displayed during the 7th 
Semester Seminar course as a part of the experience sharing regarding the skills developed 
through various courses.  

 
*Can be taken from the given sample activities/projects   
Evaluation Criteria: 
● Depth of Analysis: Quality and depth of reflections and analysis in project reports and case 
studies.  
● Application of Concepts: Ability to apply course concepts to real-world problems and 
local contexts.  
● Creativity: Innovative approaches and creative solutions proposed in projects and reflections.  
● Presentation Skills: Clarity, coherence, and professionalism in the final presentation.  
Course Outcomes (COs) 
At the end of the course students should be able to:  
Course Outcome 
Bloom’s 
Knowledge 
Level (KL) 
CO1 
Develop the ability to apply the principles of engineering ethics in their 
professional life.
K3 
CO2 
Develop the ability to exercise gender-sensitive practices in their 
professional lives
K4 
CO3 
Develop the ability to explore contemporary environmental issues and 
sustainable practices. 
K5 
CO4 
Develop the ability to analyse the role of engineers in promoting 
sustainability and climate resilience. 
K4 
CO5 
Develop interest and skills in addressing pertinent environmental and 
climate-related challenges through a sustainable engineering approach.
K3 
 
Note: K1- Remember, K2- Understand, K3- Apply, K4- Analyse, K5- Evaluate, K6- Create 
Sl. 
No. 
Item 
Particulars 
Group/I
ndividua
l (G/I) 
Marks 
1 
Reflective 
Journal 
Weekly entries reflecting on what was learned, personal 
insights, and how it can be applied to local contexts. 
I 
5
2 
Micro project  
 
(Detailed 
documentation of 
the project, 
including 
methodologies, 
findings, and 
reflections) 
1 a) Perform an Engineering Ethics Case Study analysis and 
prepare a report  
1 b) Conduct a literature survey on ‘Code of Ethics for 
Engineers’ and prepare a sample code of ethics 
G 
8
2. Listen to a TED talk on a Gender-related topic, do a literature 
survey on that topic and make a report citing the relevant 
papers with a specific analysis of the Kerala context  
G 
5
3. Undertake a project study based on the concepts of 
sustainable development* - Module II, Module III & Module 
IV 
G 
12
3 
Activities 
2. One activity* each from Module II, Module III & Module IV  
G 
15
4 
Final 
Presentation 
A comprehensive presentation summarising the key takeaways 
from the course, personal reflections, and proposed future 
actions based on the learnings.  
G 
5
Total Marks
                 50 

CO-PO Mapping Table: 
 
 
Reference Books 
Sl. No 
Title of the Book 
Name of the Author/s 
Name of the Publisher 
Edition and 
Year 
1 
Ethics in Engineering Practice 
and Research 
Caroline Whitbeck 
Cambridge University 
Press & Assessment 
2nd edition 
& August 
2011
2 
Virtue Ethics and 
Professional Roles
Justin Oakley 
Cambridge University 
Press & Assessment
November 
2006
3 
Sustainability 
Science 
Bert J. M. de Vries 
Cambridge University 
Press & Assessment 
2nd edition 
&  
December 
2023
4 
Sustainable Engineering 
Principles and 
Practice
Bhavik R. Bakshi, 
Cambridge University 
Press & Assessmen 
2019 
5 
Engineering 
Ethics  
M Govindarajan, S 
Natarajan and V S 
Senthil Kumar
PHI Learning Private 
Ltd, New Delhi 
2012 
6 
Professional 
ethics and human 
values 
RS Naagarazan 
New age international 
(P) limited New Delhi 
2006. 
7 
Ethics in 
Engineering 
Mike W Martin and 
Roland Schinzinger, 
Tata McGraw Hill 
Publishing Company 
Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
4" edition, 
2014 
 
Suggested Activities/Projects:  
Module-II 
● Write a reflection on a local environmental issue (e.g., plastic waste in Kerala backwaters or 
oceans) from different ethical perspectives (anthropocentric, biocentric, ecocentric).  
● Write a life cycle analysis report of a common product used in Kerala (e.g., a coconut, bamboo 
or rubber-based product) and present findings on its sustainability. 
● Create a sustainability report for a local business, assessing its environmental, social, and 
economic impacts  
● Presentation on biodiversity in a nearby area (e.g., a local park, a wetland, mangroves, college 
 
PO1 
PO2 
PO3 
PO4 
PO5 
PO6 
PO7 
PO8 
PO9 
PO10
PO11 PO12
CO1 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
2 
3 
3 
2 
 
2 
CO2 
 
1 
 
 
 
3 
2 
3 
3 
2 
 
2 
CO3 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
3 
2 
3 
2 
 
2 
CO4 
 
1 
 
 
 
3 
3 
2 
3 
2 
 
2 
CO5 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
3 
2 
3 
2 
 
2 

campus etc) and propose conservation strategies to protect it.  
● Develop a conservation plan for an endangered species found in Kerala.  
● Analyze the green spaces in a local urban area and propose a plan to enhance urban 
ecology using native plants and sustainable design.  
● Create a model of a sustainable urban landscape for a chosen locality in Kerala.  
 
Module-III 
● Study a local water body (e.g., a river or lake) for signs of pollution or natural flow disruption and 
suggest sustainable management and restoration practices.  
● Analyse the effectiveness of water management in the college campus and propose improvements - 
calculate the water footprint, how to reduce the footprint, how to increase supply through rainwater 
harvesting, and how to decrease the supply-demand ratio 
● Implement a zero waste initiative on the college campus for one week and document the challenges 
and outcomes.  
● Develop a waste audit report for the campus. Suggest a plan for a zero-waste approach.  
● Create a circular economy model for a common product used in Kerala (e.g., coconut oil, cloth etc).  
● Design a product or service based on circular economy and degrowth principles and present a 
business plan.  
● Develop a plan to improve pedestrian and cycling infrastructure in a chosen locality in Kerala  
Module-IV 
● Evaluate the potential for installing solar panels on the college campus including cost-benefit analysis 
and feasibility study.  
● Analyse the energy consumption patterns of the college campus and propose sustainable alternatives 
to reduce consumption - What gadgets are being used? How can we reduce demand using energy-
saving gadgets? 
● Analyse a local infrastructure project for its climate resilience and suggest improvements.  
● Analyse a specific environmental regulation in India (e.g., Coastal Regulation Zone) and its impact 
on local communities and ecosystems.  
● Research and present a case study of a successful sustainable engineering project in Kerala/India 
(e.g., sustainable building design, water management project, infrastructure project).  
● Research and present a case study of an unsustainable engineering project in Kerala/India 
highlighting design and implementation faults and possible corrections/alternatives (e.g., a housing 
complex with water logging, a water management project causing frequent floods, infrastructure 
project that affects surrounding landscapes or ecosystems).  

SEMESTER: S4 
PRODUCTION ENGINEERING LAB